_____________________________________________________________________
 OSEP: XXXX
 Title: Informational proposal: openSUSE Distribution Daemon User Names
 Version: 0.1
 Last-Modified: 28 Feb 2014
 Author: Guido Berhoerster <gber@opensuse.org>, Ludwig Nussel <ludwig.nussel@suse.de>
 Status: Draft 
 Type: Informational
 Created: 28 Feb 2014
 Post-History: 
_____________________________________________________________________

Abstract
--------

This OSEP proposes a defined pattern for unprivileged system user
names.


Specification
-------------

Packages that add unprivileged users to e.g. run daemons as need to
use names that follow the following regular expression:

  ^_[0-9a-z][0-9a-z_]*[0-9a-z]$

This policy is meant to be applied to all packages that are new to
openSUSE Factory. Existing packages are encouraged to switch to the
new policy.

Motivation
----------

Many packages need to add user names for their unprivileged daemons.
Many such names are short for convenience. Since there is no
separate name space for system users those names may collide with
names of real persons. A common pattern for user names on unix
systems also is to combine letters of the given names and the
surname which may lead to combinations that may also collide with
system user names. Sharing a user name between a system user and a
normal user leads to surprising or even security relevant
misbehavior as the daemon user may write to files in the real user's
home or vice versa.

Since introducing a separate namespace is not possible in the
current name service model, separating system users and real users
must be done by naming them differently.

Rationale
---------

A special prefix or suffix to user names is a straight forward
solution to the same namespace problem. Since long user names may
not fully be displayed by e.g. the ps tool the chosen method needs
to be short. OpenBSD solved that by prefixing unprivileged system
user names simply with an underscore (ASCII character 95).

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the public domain.

References
----------

[bibliography]
- FIXME: add link to openBSD specification here
- current list of known user names in opensuse is maintained in link:https://build.opensuse.org/package/view_file/openSUSE:Factory/rpmlint/config?expand=1[rpmlint]
